**Starting Up your own company...**

I remember watching a fascinating part of Venture Capitalist Steve Jurvetson’s video where he asks the audience which companies they think will be in the Global Top 5 list after five years. When people say their answers which typically include the famous companies like Apple, Google etc... Steve finally says those companies are not yet incorporated, there will be new companies which will enter the scene and grow exponentially to make it to the Global Top 5\. That is the premise in which the venture capital ecosystem works and looks for funding the disruptive ideas that are pursued with passion by startup companies. Though the failure rate of these companies will be very high, the few that succeed will give them massive returns that offsets the loss that happens in funding the failed ventures.

Tesla, Amazon, Facebook, Uber, Airbnb were startups when they entered the world, and they have grown exponentially to become big successful enterprises. Artificial Intelligence, Quantum Computing, Genomics, Biotechnology, Robotics are few of the domains where we see so much disruption by startup and the world is changing faster than anyone thought due to these disruptions.

I got a call from a founder of a company requesting seed funds or grant money for his company. When I looked at the details I found they are trying to get a SEBI license to do investment advisory services for High Networth Individuals with a business plan forecast of starting with few customers and expand them as they progress. In the founder’s view, this is his startup, and he was hoping to raise funding for this idea. I explained him this is a small service business and can grow to be a sustainable business in size if they can do it right but this does not fall under the startup category as it is missing the exponential growth potential driven by a technology enabled differentiated disruption that can scale to achieve the exponential growth. 

So, we need to keep in mind that there is a big difference between startup and a small medium business. If you can identify a problem that is causing lot of pain, causing gaps in achieving the expected outcome or making people go through lot of friction and inertia in using ineffective solutions and you can come up with a better solution which is solving all or most of these issues, the value provided in the solution can make the customers to pay you and the number of customers is large and growing, it is a good example of a startup.

The ecosystem for startups has evolved nicely in India with support coming from Central and State Governments through various programs that offer financial support, private and academia incubators & accelerators that offer mentoring, guidance and act as the channel for giving the funds that come from Government, Corporates that are interested in co-innovation, venture capitals/angel investors/private equity firms that offer funding and others including consultants and small firms that offer support legal, financial and other services. If you have an innovative business idea, you can always leverage this ecosystem to help you convert that idea into a sustainable and growing business. You can get a complete list of Government programs and the incubators if you look them up on the internet or use any of the AI tools. 

While the success stories you hear are very impressive, we also need to understand that the risk is very high and more than 95% of the startups fail and a very small percentage can sustain, and even smaller percentage can make it very big such as Mini-corn, Unicorn etc.. with big valuations. The most important thing is to pick problems which can be solved with benefits 3 to 10 times compared to existing solutions for which there is a large growing market enabled by a very good business model. The most common mistake people make is to get focused on using some latest technology (like AI, ML, DL these days) and focus on creating something very cool and forget or give less priority to ten other things which are important in bringing all together for a chance to be successful.

Many educational institutes these days have entrepreneurship cells (e-cells) and incubation units as they get Government funding and support for them. If your institute has them or any other college in your locality, it would be great to find out more about their programs and how they can help you to pursue your innovative ideas. You may also find the alumni networks for your college with some of the entrepreneurs who might have succeeded or failed. It would be also good to get in touch with them for guidance. There are tons of materials, books, articles about this which you can always make use of. One of the books I would recommend is Ash Maurya’s Running Lean which gives a very good step by step approach to guide how one can convert their idea to a stage he calls as product market fit where it is a sustainable and big growth business.

Given the disruption we see in the job market due to the economy, geo-politics, impact of AI etc... Entrepreneurship is a good option to consider as there is a good support ecosystem, and the experience is always much more valuable even if you must switch to a regular employment-based carer later.